# The Environment

The shell maintains a body of information during our shell session called the `environment`. Some programs also look for values stored in the environment to adjust their behavior.

## What Is Stored in the Environment?

There are 2 basic types of data in the environment:

- **Environment variables**

- **Shell variables**

### Examining the Environment

#### `printenv`: display only the environment variables

```bash
$ printenv [name]
```

If `name` is specified, only its value is printed.

#### `set`: show both the shell and environment variables

```bash
$ set
```

The `set` command, when used without options or arguments, will display both the shell and environment variables.

#### `alias`: display aliases

```bash
$ alias
```

Neither the `set` nor `printenv` commands display aliases; use the `alias` command without any arguments instead.

### Some environment variables

| **State** | **Meaning** | 
|---|---|
| DISPLAY | The name of the display if we are running a graphical environment. Usually this is `:0`, meaning the first display generated by the X server. | 
| EDITOR | The name of the program to be used for text editing. | 
| SHELL | The name of your shell program. | 
| HOME | The pathname of your home directory. | 
| LANG | Defines the character set and collation order of your language. | 
| OLDPWD | The previous working directory. | 
| PAGER | The name of the program to be used for paging output. This is often set to `/usr/bin/less`. | 
| PATH | A colon-separated list of directories that are searched when you enter the name of a executable program. | 
| PS1 | This stands for “prompt string 1.” This defines the contents of the shell prompt. As we will later see, this can be extensively customized. | 
| PWD | The current working directory. | 
| TERM | The name of your terminal type. Unix-like systems support many terminal protocols; this variable sets the protocol to be used with your terminal emulator. | 
| TZ | Specifies your time zone. Most Unix-like systems maintain the computer’s internal clock in *Coordinated Universal Time* (*UTC*) and then display the local time by applying an offset specified by this variable. | 
| USER | Your username. | 

## How Is the Environment Established?

### Shell

When we log on to the system, the shell program (bash, zsh, fish etc.) starts and reads a series of configuration scripts called *startup files*, which define the default environment shared by all users. This is followed by more startup files in our home directory that define our personal environment. The exact sequence depends on the type of shell session being started. There are 2 kinds:

- A **login shell session**: A login shell session is one in which we are prompted for our username and password. This happens when we start a virtual console session, for example.

   Startup files for login shell sessions:

   `/etc/profile` —> `~/.bash_profile` (—> `~/.bash_login` —> `~/.profile` )

   

   File

   Contents

   
   `/etc/profile`

   (`/etc/zprofile`)

   A global configuration script that applies to all users.

   
   `~/.bash_profile`

   (`~/.zprofile`)

   A user’s personal startup file. This can be used to extend or override settings in the global configuration script.

   
   `~/.bash_login`

   (`~/.zlogin`)

   If `～/.bash_profile` is not found, bash attempts to read this script.

   
   `~/.profile`

   If neither `~/.bash_profile` nor `~/.bash_login` is found, bash attempts to read this file. This is the default in Debian-based distributions, such as Ubuntu.

   
   

- A **non-login shell session**: A non-login shell session typically occurs when we launch a termianl session in the GUI.

   Startup files for non-login shell sessions

   `/etc/bash.bashrc` or `/etc/bashrc` —> `~/.bashrc`

   

   File

   Contents

   
   `/etc/bash.bashrc`

   or `/etc/bashrc`

   (`/etc/zshrc`)

   A global configuration script that applies to all users

   
   `~/.bashrc`

   (`~/.zshrc`)

   A user’s personal startup file. It can be used to extend or override settings in the global configuration script.

   
   

   Non-login shells inherit the environment from their parent process, usually a login shell.

   The `~/.bashrc` file is probably the most important startup file from the ordinary user’s point of view, since it is almost always read. Non-login shells read it by default and most startup files for login shells are written in such a way as to read the `~/.bashrc` file as well.

### `PATH`

- Show `PATH` content:

   ```bash
   $ echo $PATH
   ```

- Add path to `PATH` variable temporarily:

   ```bash
   $ export PATH="/path/to/your/directory:$PATH"
   ```

   or

   ```bash
   $ export PATH="$PATH:/path/to/your/diretory"
   ```

- The `PATH` variables is often set by the shell‘s starup file. The specific  file and method for setting the PATH variable depend on the shell type and the operating system distribution.

## Modifying the Environment

### Which files should we modify?

- (In generl, )To add directories to your `PATH` or define additional environment variables, place those changes in `.bash_profile` (`.zprofile`).

- For everything else, please the change in `.bashrc` (`.zshrc`).

### Activating our changes

The changes we have made to our shell’s config file will not take effect until we close our terminal session and start a new one because the config file is only read at the beginning of a session. However, we can force shell to reread the modified the config file with the following command:

```bash
$ source ~/.bashrc
# or
$ source ~/.zshrc
```